Dear MakeGamesWithUs students, friends and fans,

We have two big announcements to share with you today. We’re changing our name to MakeSchool and launching a new [Gap Year](https://www.makeschool.com/gap-year/overview) program. The Gap Year is a 1 year college supplement where students learn mobile and web development, computer science theory, and intern at a tech company. Our pilot class of 11 students kicked off in September.

We founded the company in 2012 with the mission to teach students how to build and ship real products - an inspiring and fulfilling experience that opens the door to a successful career in tech. We started out helping our beloved high school teacher Mike Thibodeaux teach his class of 12 computer science students how to build their own iPhone games. Since then we’ve held 3 years of summer programs and set up courses at 3 of the top 4 computer science universities. This summer we taught 123 students from 16 countries at our [Summer Academy](https://www.makeschool.com/summer-academy/overview) in Palo Alto, San Francisco and New York City. Since our founding, we’ve taught over 500 students through in person courses and over a million students through our online tutorials.

Over the past few years, we noticed two common themes in Silicon Valley. First, most founders and developers feel their computer science degrees didn’t teach them many skills relevant to their careers. Second, most companies are struggling to hire talented developers. There’s a rapidly expanding skills gap between what universities teach and what companies need. Our revitalized mission is to build a more relevant and practical alternative to the computer science degree.

We’re building the college experience we wished existed, an education rooted in theoretical foundations with heavy emphasis on the technologies, tools and practices relevant to today’s industry. We believe in learning by doing, studying takes a back seat to creating. We believe the app is the new resume, a portfolio of products is more powerful than any credential. We believe coding is the world’s first superpower, our graduates will help make the world a better place. Our goal is to help inspire and educate the next generation of superheroes.

To our team, thank you for believing in us and pouring your heart and soul into teaching others. To our students, thank you for taking a chance on a new style of education and inspiring us everyday. To our investors, friends and family, thank you for supporting us and motivating us to overcome the challenges we’ve faced. We’re blessed to be surrounded by such an amazing community as we attempt to tackle one of the most difficult and important problems facing tomorrow’s economy.

We’re incredibly excited to open the next chapter in our journey as MakeSchool, stay tuned :)

Ashu and Jeremy